---
layout: post
title: "Important: No more boost-eselect after boost-1.50-r2"
description: "Critical changes in gentoo happened recently..."
category: programming
tags: [boost, eselect, C++, problem]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

**Attention** gentoo/C++ developers who use boost library!
Starting from ``=dev-libs/boost-1.50.0-r2`` there is no more ``eselect`` profiles! So, no way to switch
between few versions of boost! And no way to easy (lazy :) detect it from your configure scripts (only hard way :).

Tiziano Müller, the author of ``=dev-libs/boost-1.50-r2`` ebuild, which is recently (silently) appears
in a portage tree kindly gave me some explanations about future directions according boost and eselect:

    Yes, that change is intentional.
    I know that this makes the live for people using Gentoo as development
    platform harder, but unfortunately this is how we have to proceed.

    See my announcement on the gentoo-dev ml here:
    http://marc.info/?l=gentoo-dev&m=134580187015362&w=1

    and an earlier discussion here:
    http://marc.info/?l=gentoo-dev&m=132704075103126&w=1

    I'll do an official announcement on gentoo-dev-announce (and maybe a news item)
    at least when it hits stable (possibly already if it gets unmasked).

So we (C++ developers) have to do smth w/ this, cuz live getting harder %)
To make life little simple the ebuild creates a bunch of short (unversioned) symlinks to the ``/usr/lib/boost-1_50``
directory, so sometimes it would be enough to add ``-L/usr/lib/boost-1_50`` option for linker
and ``-I/usr/include/boost-1_50`` for compiler.

Fortunately cmake (my primary build system) has a good enough boost detection support, but some packages
in my system got broken :( and I have no time to fix 'em. Particularly [schroot](https://bugs.gentoo.org/show_bug.cgi?id=432790)
has broken and unable to detect boost anymore... and to fix it ``configure.ac`` needs sane boost
detection (yep, nowadays it is simple and naive... u even unable to specify a custom location for it).
Or alternative way is to hack an ebuild and provide ``-L`` and ``-I`` via ``xxFLAGS`` environment before
configure. This would be easy than rewrite a boost detector in the schroot's ``configure.ac`` ...

**Update:** I've hacked the schroot ebuild and add it to the bug reported...
([here](https://github.com/zaufi/zaufi-overlay/blob/master/dev-util/schroot/schroot-1.4.26-r1.ebuild)
is a copy in my overlay)

**Update:** ``=net-libs/telepathy-log-qt-0.10.2`` fails to build also, cuz implicitly depends on boost via
qt-gstreamer which is use some header-only libraries. A bug related to qt-gstreamer is
[here](https://bugs.gentoo.org/show_bug.cgi?id=432242).

**Update:** My report about schroot was included as blocker to another one (bigger)
bug [list of packages that become broken w/ boost-1.50.0-r2](https://bugs.gentoo.org/show_bug.cgi?id=425188).
Separate bug about telepathy-log-qt is [here](https://bugs.gentoo.org/show_bug.cgi?id=432976).
