---
layout: post
title: "Gentoo Problem Of The Week (#9)"
description: "Solving current problems on __World__ updating"
category: gentoo
tags: [gentoo,problem,wifi,dbus]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Sun Feb 16 21:51:23 MSK 2014
----------------------------

This week I've faced w/ multiple problems. I'm not rebooting my laptop about a week (installing updates).
It started after reboot: DBus 1.8.0 gets crashed w/ malloc check (feature of glibc), so KDM won't let me to login
(due `consolekit` is not started as well). Compile it w/ full debug and no optimizations can helps, but further
investigation still required. While fighting w/ this bug I've discovered a note from the `NEWS` file of
`consolekit` package:

    NOTE: ConsoleKit is no longer actively maintained and this will most
    likely be the final release. You are advised to switch to logind:
    http://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd-logind.service.html

At the Getnoo's wiki [page](http://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/ConsoleKit) about ConsoleKit:

> ConsoleKit's function is to support in multiuser setups. 
> **It also works for a single user, but offers no benefit compared to existing methods.**

Then I've tried to get rid of console kit (completely), but was failed, cuz `polkit` depends on it ;-(

**Looks like it is time to think about a migraion to the <del>notorious</del> `systemd`? **

Now I'm living w/ a debug version of `dbus-1.8.0` and further investigation still required…
(I'll update this post later w/ results)

The second trouble happened w/ `=wpa_supplicant-2.1` -- it just drop connection after regulatory rules gets
updated saying smth uncertain about `Reason 7`. While investigation I've met the `net-wireless/iw` utility,
which is intended to supersede the `net-wireless/wireless-tools` (with `iwlist`, `iwconfig` utilities).
It provides the `iw` executable, which is capable to do much more things 
(see [homepage](http://wireless.kernel.org/en/users/Documentation/iw)). Particularly, to 
[change](http://wireless.kernel.org/en/developers/Regulatory/CRDA#Using_iw_to_change_regulatory_domains) current
regulatory rules:

    root@gentop〉 ~〉 iw reg set RU
    root@gentop〉 ~〉 iw reg get
    country RU: DFS-UNSET
        (2402 - 2482 @ 40), (N/A, 20)
        (5170 - 5250 @ 80), (N/A, 20)
        (5250 - 5330 @ 80), (N/A, 20), DFS
        (5650 - 5730 @ 80), (N/A, 30), DFS
        (5735 - 5835 @ 80), (N/A, 30)

Unlike the `iwconfig`, this tool have no a bash-completion file yet ;( and its CLI is quite complicated to use it
w/o any help ;-)

Also I've found that is possible to hack and recompile `regulatory.bin` file 
(one may find a video tutorial about this ;-).

Unfortunately, I didn't find any reason why my WiFi goes down (loosing AP connection) and only after a manual 
(re)scan can reconnect, so my solution is to mask the buggy 2.1 version of `wpa_supplicant`… 
A bug needs to be reported (sometime).
